KEP-3636 CSI Drivers in Windows as HostProcess Pods (#3641)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-windows/3636-windows-csi-host-process-pods/README.md

| Support for legacy client/server model|Still supported|Not supported|Not supported|

### Maintenance of the new model and existing client/server model of CSI Proxy

The `library-development` branch will be used for the development of this model. `master` will have the existing
client/server mode. We plan to create alpha tags on the `library-development` branch and use it in CSI Drivers.
Once integrated, we will create a v2 tag and make `library-deveopment` the new default. `master` will point
to the new implementation, whereas the legacy code is maintained on the`v1.x`.

`v1.x` will still be open for urgent bug fixes but new features should be developed in the v2 codebase.

### Security analysis

We suggest enabling HostProcess containers only for system workloads. One of the drawbacks of this new mode is the
lack of filesystem isolation, which means that HostProcess containers have entire visibility of the host fileystem.
To prevent workloads from accessing specific paths in the host we recommend:

- Creating a Windows user with limited permissions to create files under the kubelet controlled path `C:\var\lib\kubelet`

> - Enabling `PodSecurityAdmission` on the namespace where system components run. Note that this needs an additiona

Reviewer: I'm not sure this will buy someone anything as the CSI plugin would have to run as "Privileged" in order to have .windowsOptions.hostProcess=true. So it's really just opening up the namespace where it runs.

Author: I read more about Pod Security Standards and how it works with the Pod Security Admission controller, I've updated this part with a section for Cluster Administrators, please take a look again.

  this workflow is not as simple as the Linux counterpart which only needs to update Go dependencies.
- Multiple API versions to maintain - As part of the original design of CSI Proxy it was decided to have different
  protobuf versions whenever there were breaking changes (like updates in the protobuf services & messages), this lead
  to having multiple versions of the API (v1alphaX, v1betaX, v1). In addition, if we want to add a new feature we'd need
  to create a new API version e.g. v2alpha1 ([see this PR as an example of adding methods to the Volume API Group](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-proxy/pull/186)).

In 1.22, SIG Windows introduced [HostProcess containers](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2021/08/16/windows-hostprocess-containers/)
as an alternative way to run containers. HostProcess containers run directly in the host
and behave like to a regular process.

Using HostProcess containers in CSI Drivers enables CSI Drivers to perform the privileged storage operations
directly. Most of the drawbacks in the client/server model are no longer present in the new model.

> ### Goals

Author: Another goal: Identify node version skew problems, this is in the CSI Proxy guide but should also be in the KEP, ref https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-proxy/pull/285

  both models.
- Define strict security implementation details - A goal is to understand the security implications of enabling HostProcess
  containers. We aim to provide guidelines but not implementation details about the components that need to be installed
  in the cluster.

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

This proposal advocates for evolving CSI Proxy from a standalone binary into a Go library that CSI drivers can directly import.
By leveraging HostProcess containers, CSI drivers for Windows can bundle the necessary privileged functionality,
eliminating the need for a separate proxy component running on each node.
This shift simplifies the deployment and maintenance model for both driver developers and cluster administrators.

The core of this proposal is to:

> - Refactor the CSI Proxy codebase to expose its API groups as importable Go packages, removing the client/server gRPC architecture.

Reviewer 2: In a sig-storage meeting, @bswartz advocated for supporting _both_ solutions (existing CSI-proxy, due to security benefits) and HostProcess mode. As I understand it, the current KEP proposes that HostProcess mode be a replacement for CSI-proxy. So I think this is something worth discussing more, seems like a really important decision that we should close on sooner rather than later.

Right now we maintain the HostProcess implementation in a separate branch over at https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-proxy, which may not be ideal in the world where we decide to maintain both solutions.

cc: @msau42

      We recommend taking the time to analyze the types of workloads occurring in each namespace, and by referencing the Pod Security Standards,
      decide on an appropriate level for each of them. Unlabeled namespaces should only indicate that they've yet to be evaluated.
    - Namespaces allowing privileged workloads should establish and enforce appropriate access controls.
    - For workloads running in those permissive namespaces, maintain documentation about their unique security requirements.
      If at all possible, consider how those requirements could be further constrained.
  - In namespaces without privileged workloads:
    - Follow the guidelines in https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/enforce-standards-namespace-labels/#applying-to-a-single-namespace,
      for example, add the following labels to a namespace:

  ```plain
  kubectl label --overwrite ns my-existing-namespace \
    pod-security.kubernetes.io/enforce=restricted \
    pod-security.kubernetes.io/enforce-version=v1.25
  ```

    - Both the baseline and restricted Pod Security Standards disallows the creation of HPC pods (docs).

> - Create a Windows user with limited permissions to create files under the kubelet controlled path `C:\var\lib\kubelet`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Create a Windows group with limited permissions to create files under the kubelet controlled path `C:\var\lib\kubelet` and set the `runAsUserName` in the pod spec to that group
```

see more details under https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-windows/1981-windows-privileged-container-support#container-users
